














Contents

1 Description
2 Synopsis
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 28 June 2008, a Bombardier CRJ 700 operated by PSA Airlines, during daytime pushback collided with a stationary CRJ 200 of the same company at Douglas International Airport Charlotte, North Carolina. Due to thunderstorm activity in the vicinity of the airport, the ground personnel were not wearing headsets which consequently resulted in inadequate coordination and ultimately in a collision.


Synopsis
This is an extract from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Report NYC08LA234B on the accident:
A CRJ 200 had completed the pushback process and was waiting for taxi clearance. A CRJ 700 was being pushed back from another gate, with a wing walker stationed at the left wing. The wing walker was aware of the CRJ 200, and when the pushback commenced, he believed that the tugdriver was only going to pushback the airplane about 10 feet, just enough to trigger the aircraft communication addressing and reporting system (ACARS) "out" time. As the tugdriver continued to push the airplane past 10 feet, the wing walker signaled the tugdriver to stop. He continued to attempt to alert the tugdriver; however, the tugdriver did not observe the wing walker before the tail section of the CRJ 700, struck the tail section of the CRJ 200.Witnesses observed the wing walker signaling the tugdriver to stop as the tugdriver continued to push the airplane. […] Due to lightning in the vicinity of airport, ground crewmembers were not using headsets.
The NTSB determined the probable cause(s) of this accident as: 


the tugdriver and wing walker's lack of communication, and

the tugdriver's failure to properly monitor the wing walker.


Contributing factor to the accident was the lightning in the vicinity of the airport, which resulted in the ground crewmembers not wearing headsets.


Related Articles
GND


Wing Tip Clearance Hazard, 

Pushback, 

Accident and Serious Incident Reports: GND


WX


Lightning




Further Reading

For further information see the NTSB Reports NYC08LA234A


and NYC08LA234B





