













Contents

1 Description
2 Investigation
3 Video
4 Related Articles


Description
On 29 May 2009, the flight crew of a Bombardier CRJ 200 being operated by PSA Airlines on a departing scheduled passenger flight in normal daylight visibility observed a small aircraft enter the runway ahead of them whilst at high speed on their full length take off roll at Charlotte but were able to make an emergency stop on the centerline just clear of the other aircraft, a privately operated Pilatus PC12, which had moved to the side of the runway when its pilot realised what was going on.

Investigation
An Investigation into this Incident was carried out by the NTSB. They ascertained that the PC-12 had entered the runway at the intersection requested for take off after clearance to do so had been issued by the responsible TWR controller. They found that the TWR controller involved had received the PC-12 traffic from GND through the prescribed procedure. 
The Investigation estimated that the CRJ-200 was approximately 500m into its take off roll and at a speed in excess of 80 kts148.16 km/h 41.12 m/s. A rapid rejected take off response to sight of the PC-12 led to the CRJ coming to a stop just clear of the PC12 on its left with approximately 3 metres clearance to spare.
It was noted the ASDE-X had provided an alert which was too late to be effective and that the controller’s own action to rescind the take off clearance was also too late to have had any bearing on the outcome.
There appeared to have been no awareness of the PC12 pilots, either by R/T monitoring or visually, of the clearance given to the CRJ 200 prior to their own line up clearance.
The Investigation did not make any Safety Recommendations. The NTSB determined as a result of the Investigation that the probable cause was “The Charlotte local control east controller's failure to ensure that the runway was clear prior to authorizing N409DR (the PC-12) to enter the runway.”
The full NTSB Report may be seen at SKYbrary bookshelf: OPS09IA005A

Video

Animation of the accident


Related Articles

Runway Incursion

Runway Incursion (OGHFA SE)

Runway Incursion : Investigation Check List - Aircraft Operator

Accident and Serious Incident Reports: RI

Perception in ATC

Situational Awareness






