











Description
On 10 February, 2007 an Airbus 320-200 being operated by JetBlue Airways on a scheduled passenger flight from  New York JFK to Nassau was climbing through 7000 feet in day VMC when the cabin crew reported to the flight deck that there were signs of smoke from an actual or incipient overhead bin fire.  Whilst the cabin crew discharged a fire extinguisher into the locker and then at the source bag after removing it, the flight crew levelled the aircraft at 7600 feet, declared an emergency and made a priority return to JFK which was reached without further event six minutes later. After stopping on the runway to confirm that no continuing hazard existed, the aircraft was taxied in to the gate and passengers left normally.

Investigation
An investigation was carried out by the NTSB which found that the smoke had originated from a bag containing camera equipment which had been stowed in an overhead bin. Examination of the contents of the bag disclosed that it had contained a nylon camera equipment bag within which was a video camera and various ancillary items including a number of batteries, both loose and in packs, to which fire damage was evident in the case of two 14 volt rechargeable lithium ion battery packs and one 9 volt lithium battery.  Further investigation showed that the 9 volt battery had sustained damage consistent with a catastrophic internal failure. It was found that ”the main component of the 9-volt battery had a flashpoint of 21 degrees Fahrenheit, or room temperature. Other batteries, located in the same pocket of the equipment bag as the 9-volt battery, had unprotected contacts, including (the) two fully charged 14-volt battery packs. One of the 14-volt battery packs displayed significant exterior thermal damage, consistent with damage from coming in contact with another battery.” It was noted that battery industry research has indicated that a short circuit is the most common cause of battery fires and is often initiated when contacts come into contact with metal objects (such as parts of other batteries).
The Investigation determined that the Probable Cause of the in-flight fire was the catastrophic failure of a 9-volt battery from an unknown cause.”
The Final Report of the Investigation was adopted on 30 April 2008. It did not include any Safety Recommendations.

Further Reading

Aircraft Fire Risk from Battery-powered Items Carried on Aircraft

Personal Electronic Device Fire - Cabin Crew Checklist

Fire Smoke and Fumes

Smoke Gases






