











Description
On 4 October 2007, an Antonov An-26B cargo aircraft being operated for an unidentified Hungarian-registered carrier by a Ukrainian crew on an empty positioning flight from Stuttgart to Kassel overran the destination runway during a daylight landing in normal ground visibility. None of the six crew on board were injured. There was no damage to the aircraft but some damage to ground installations.

Investigation
An investigation was carried out by the German BFU. It was found that the aircraft had been flown at 15% above the applicable reference speed during the LLZ/DME approach during which the runway had been visible from about 4nm7,408 m 7.408 km 24,304.462 ft out. After the main gear initially touched the 1500 metre runway 22 about 400 metres from the threshold, the aircraft had bounced several times before settling on it permanently from approximately the half way point. Reverse pitch had not been used at first but was eventually selected shortly before the end of the paved surface was reached.
The aircraft overran the centrally ‘domed’ runway just over 40 metres to a final stopping position which was also 47 metres to the left of the runway centreline with the nose of the aircraft orientated towards approximately 120°. The aircraft had sunk up to the wheel rims in soft grass. 
No aircraft technical defects were found during the investigation nor had the crew reported any and it was also determined that the benign weather conditions had not had any effect on the outcome.
It was concluded as a result of the investigation that the accident had been due to the fact that:


 the aircraft continued the approach with excessive speed

 the aircraft did not touch down at the beginning of the runway

 following touchdown, full use was not made of the available braking action.


No Safety Recommendations were made.
The Investigation was completed on 10 September 2010 and the Final Report may be seen in full at SKYbrary: BFU EX011-07

Further Reading

Non-Precision Approach

Stabilised Approach

Runway Availability

Landing Distances

Runway Overrun After Unstabilised Approach (OGHFA SE)

Runway Overrun On Landing (OGHFA SE)






