













Description
On 19 October 2013, an ATR 42-300 freighter (P2-PXY) being operated by Air Niugini on a cargo flight from Madang to Tabubil as flight PX2900 failed to get airborne from Madang in normal day ground visibility and a rejected take off from high speed resulted in an overrun through the perimeter fence and into a shallow creek where the aircraft became semi submerged. The three pilots on board escaped through the flight deck roof hatch and were uninjured but the aircraft sustained significant damage.

 An aerial view of the aircraft final stopping position. Reproduced from the Official Report.
Investigation
An Investigation by the Papua New Guinea Accident Investigation Commission has commenced.  The FDR and CVR have both been recovered and downloaded and both have provided useful information to assist the Investigation.
It has been established that the aircraft had just recently arrived from Port Moresby, after which inbound cargo had been unloaded and new cargo, consisting exclusively of cigarettes packed in large cardboard cartons, had been loaded. The full 1569 metre length of runway 25 was used for take off and everything was normal until the aircraft commander, who was PF for the flight, attempted to rotate at Vr, which the crew had calculated to be 102 KIAS. He reported having found the controls very heavy in pitch and was unable to pull the control column back as normal. FDR data indicated that after approximately two seconds, action was taken to reject the take off. Full reverse pitch was selected and maximum braking was applied.    
The aircraft did not stop before reaching the end of the runway and it continued over the shallow embankment at the end and the right wing then struck the perimeter fence which caused the aircraft to yaw to the right and enter a creek just beyond it at an angle of approximately 45° to the runway centreline. The outer section of the right wing caught fire and the fuselage became semi submerged in the water. The pilots escaped through the flight deck roof hatch.  

 Another aerial view showing how the perimeter fence affected the aircraft's excursion. Reproduced from the Official Report.
The Airport Fire and Rescue Service arrived quickly and tackled the right wing fire with foam and water. Their supply of extinguishant were exhausted before the fire was fully out but it did not spread to the inner wing. Almost immediately, local people began to enter the aircraft through the escape hatch and the rear right hand door, which was above water, and began to remove both the cargo and items from the flight deck.
In addition to the damage to the right wing, further damage resulted from the partial immersion in salt water and during the salvage operation to recover the aircraft to dry land, when the right engine fell off into the water and both propellers were destroyed.

 The aircraft partially submerged in the creek prior to recovery. Reproduced from the Official Report.
It has been noted that the 37 year old aircraft commander had over 7000 flying hours, about half of which were on the ATR42/72. The 33 year old First Officer had just over 3000 flying hours with the majority of these on the ATR42/72. A third pilot current on the Bombardier DHC8 was also on board in order to provide guidance to the operating crew during the approach to Tabubil with which they were unfamiliar.
A preliminary review of the loading of the aircraft in Madang has been carried out. It was found that 330 cartons of locally- manufactured cigarettes had been placed on the aircraft, each containing between 5000 and 10,000 cigarettes. This was the maximum possible traffic load because of the need to tanker fuel because insufficient would be available at Tabubil to continue on the next leg from there due to restrictions on fuel supply. The assumed weight of each carton was 12 kg but the shipper subsequently provided the Investigation with average carton weights for each of the three carton types loaded and it was found that the majority of cartons loaded had been 10% heavier than their assumed weight thereby making the actual aircraft weight nearly 600 kg more than declared. 
It was not possible to examine the distribution of the cartons as loaded because about a third of them had been removed before the Investigation had begun. However, information from one of the shipper's staff who had been closely involved in the loading was used to help work out the number of cartons which had actually been loaded in the most forward bay. This was estimated to have been the maximum allowed in the bay instead of the significantly reduced number which had been given in the loading instructions for that particular bay by the crew because of the need to keep the aircraft trim within limits. The effect of this difference was that the weight in that specific compartment was likely to have been more than three times what was shown on the loadsheet - 1136kg instead of the 350 kg. 
The Investigation is continuing and will include:


 a full analysis of the loading of the aircraft and the weight and balance consequences



 a review of the aircraft operator's cargo handling and loading procedures



 a detailed analysis of all FDR parameters from the accident takeoff 



 a  comparison of FDR data recorded during the accident take off with that recorded on previous take offs



 analysis of CVR data


A Preliminary Report on which this summary is based was released on 10 December 2013.


Further Reading

 Rejected Take Off

 Aircraft Load and Trim

 Rejected Take Off: ATC Considerations

 Loading of Aircraft Holds

 Rejecting a take-off after V1, why does it still happen?, NLR Report, March 2010






