











Contents

1 Description
2 The Investigation
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 22 July 2008, a Kelowna Flightcraft Air Charter Ltd. Boeing 727-200 was operating a cargo flight from Moncton NB, to Hamilton, OT. After radar vectoring for an approach to Runway 06 at Hamilton, the aircraft touched down hard and bounced before touching down hard a second time. Immediately after the second touchdown, a go-around was initiated. During rotation, the tailskid made contact with the runway. The thrust reverser actuator fairing and the number 2 engine tailpipe made contact with the ground off the departure end of the runway. The aircraft climbed away and then returned for a normal landing on Runway 12. There were no injuries; the aircraft sustained only minor damage.

The Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Canadian Transportation Safety Board. 
Their findings as to Causes and Contributing Factors were as follows:
(1)	The go-around was initiated with the spoilers deployed. This resulted in added drag that precluded a safe lift-off and caused the tail and the number 2 engine to strike the ground.
(2)	The crew had not received any training for a bounced landing or a go-around after touchdown and therefore did not retract the spoilers.
Their findings as to Risk were as follows:
(1)	The bounced landing recovery and go-around procedures do not direct crews to stow the spoilers. In the event of a go-around after touchdown, crews may leave the speedbrake lever in the extended position, increasing the risk of the aircraft not being able to meet the required climb gradient.
(2)	Cockpit voice recorder (CVR) information regarding this incident was overwritten. The lack of CVR data hampered investigators’ ability to obtain a timely and complete understanding of the event.
One other Finding of the Investigation was given. This was that “while vertical acceleration was recorded at 1.9 g and 2.3 g, it is likely that the actual g values experienced by the aircraft were higher.”
One Safety Recommendation was made as a result of the Investigation:
“The Department of Transport require air carriers to incorporate bounced landing recovery techniques in their flight manuals and to teach these techniques during initial and recurrent training.”

Related Articles
LOC


Go-around from Low Airspeed/Low Thrust

Flying a Manual Go-around


Further Reading

The TSB Report was published on 6 August 2009 and may be seen in full at http://www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/830.pdf






