













Contents

1 Description
2 Summary
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 22nd August 1985, a B737-200 operated by British Airtours, a wholly-owned subsidiary of British Airways, suffered an uncontained engine failure, with fire spreading to the fuselage during the rejected take off, causing rapid destruction of the aircraft before many of the occupants had evacuated.

Summary
About 30 seconds after the aircraft began its take-off roll, as the airspeed passed 125 kts231.5 km/h 64.25 m/s, the left engine suffered an uncontained failure, which punctured a wing fuel tank access panel. Fuel leaking from the wing ignited and burnt as a large plume of fire trailing directly behind the engine. The crew heard a "thud" and, believing that they had suffered a burst tyre or bird strike, abandoned the take-off immediately, intending to clear the runway to the right. They had no indication of fire until 9 seconds later, when the left engine fire warning occurred. After an exchange with ATC, during which the fire was confirmed, the commander warned his crew of an evacuation from the right side of the aircraft, by making a broadcast on the cabin address system, and brought the aircraft to a halt.
The wind carried the fire onto and around the rear fuselage. After the aircraft was stopped, the hull was penetrated rapidly and smoke, possibly with some flame transients, entered the cabin through the aft rear door which was opened shortly before the aircraft came to a halt. Subsequently fire developed within the cabin. Despite prompt attendance of the airport fire service, the aircraft was destroyed and 55 persons on board lost their lives.

Related Articles

 Airworthiness

 Fire

 Uncontained Engine Failure

 Ignition of Fuels

 Engine Failure During Takeoff - Multi-Engine Transport Category Jet Aircraft

 Engine/APU on Fire: Guidance for Controllers

 Engine Fire Protection

 Operational Fires

 Rejected Take Off

 Emergency Evacuation on Land


Further Reading
For further information:


 see the full AAIB Report including Appendices: AAIB AAR 8/88

 see also FAA "Lessons Learned from  Transport Airplane Accidents": British Airtours Flight KT28M, Boeing Model 737-236, G-BGJL






