











Contents

1 Description
2 Investigation
3 Similar Accident
4 Related Articles
5 Information Source


Description
On 28 October 2016, the crew of a Boeing 767-300 (N345AN) being operated by American Airlines on a scheduled passenger flight from Chicago O'Hare to Miami as AA383 rejected take off from a high speed in normal day visibility when a very loud noise was heard from the vicinity of the right  engine, a GE CF6-80C2B6. It soon became apparent that the engine had suffered a catastrophic and uncontained engine failure as a result of which a fuel-fed fire developed rapidly as soon as the aircraft came to a stop. An emergency evacuation was successfully accomplished during which 23 of the 161 passengers and one member of the 7 person cabin crew sustained minor injuries.

Investigation
An Investigation into the accident has been opened by the NTSB. The DFDR and CVR have been recovered and a preliminary review of data from the former has been completed. 
It has been established that the aircraft began its take off roll on runway 28R from the intersection with taxiway N5 which is approximately 990 metres from the start of the runway and provides a TORA of approximately 2970 metres. After a take off roll of approximately 1000 metres and with the aircraft at a recorded airspeed of approximately 128 knots, a sudden failure of the right engine occurred. Two seconds later, at a recorded airspeed of 134 knots, a rejected take off was initiated. The aircraft then came to a stop approximately 800 metres further on within about 25 seconds and ignition of fuel leaking from the right wing and pooling under it led to a major fire quickly developing. A rapid emergency evacuation allowed all 170 occupants to get out of the aircraft before the fire took significant hold and the RFFS arrived at the aircraft to begin foam application in just under 3 minutes of being notified. Engine and wing debris were found in the area around a gouge in the runway surface which was in the vicinity of the point of engine failure.
The Investigation has found that "the right engine stage 2 high pressure turbine disk fractured into at least 4 pieces (one of which) went through the inboard section of the right wing, over the fuselage and into a UPS warehouse facility". One of the fractures has been observed to show "features consistent with fatigue cracking initiating at an internal inclusion near the forward side of the hub’s inner bore".  It has been found that the failed disk had accumulated 10,984 cycles out of a life limit of 15,000 cycles. Ongoing metallurgical examinations of the disk will focus on "detailed characterization of the inclusion and the fracture surfaces". The recovered disk pieces and the four locations where they were found are shown in the two diagrams below. 

 The four recovered Stage 2 high pressure turbine disk pieces [Reproduced from the NTSB Investigative Update]
 An overview showing the location of the four recovered turbine disk pieces (A, B, C, D)  [Reproduced from the NTSB Investigative Update]
The NTSB 'Investigative Update' on which this summary is primarily based was issued on 4 November 2016.

Similar Accident
B772, Las Vegas NV USA, 2015 (NTSB Investigation not yet completed)

Related Articles

Rejected Take Off

Rejected Takeoff (OGHFA SE)

Uncontained Engine Failure

Operational Fires

Emergency Evacuation on Land

Engine Fire Protection


Information Source

The 29 October final American Airlines Press Statement on occupant injuries






