










Contents

1 Description
2 Investigation
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 8 September 2015, the crew of a Boeing 777-200ER (G-VIIO) being operated by British Airways on a scheduled passenger flight from Las Vegas to London Gatwick as BA2276 with an augmented crew rejected take off from Las Vegas in day VMC when a very loud noise was heard from the vicinity of the left engine, a GE90-85B. It soon became apparent that the engine had suffered a catastrophic and uncontained failure as a result of which a fuel fed fire developed rapidly as soon as the aircraft came to a stop. A MAYDAY was declared and an emergency evacuation ordered and successfully accomplished. 

 The aircraft on fire before the evacuation commenced (reproduced from the NTSB website - attributed to "@Bradley_Hampton via Twitter on www.nydailynews.com")
Investigation
An Investigation into the accident has been opened by the NTSB. The Board initially advised as follows:


There were several minor injuries as a result of the evacuation (mostly abrasions).

The FDR, CVR and QAR have all been removed from the aircraft and are currently being downloaded.

An initial examination of the left GE90 engine on-wing found multiple breaches of the engine case in the area around the high pressure compressor.

Examination of the material recovered from runway identified several pieces of the high pressure compressor spool (approximately 18 - 20 cm long).

An initial examination of the aircraft by investigators has established that the left engine and pylon, left fuselage structure and inboard left wing airplane were substantially damaged by the fire.

 After removal and a full teardown of the left engine, it was found that part of the stage 8-10 spool in the HP compressor (HPC) had failed and some of the resulting fragments had then breached the engine case and cowling. The origin of the failure has been traced to the HPC stage 8 disk web, a part of the stage 8-10 spool. All the pieces from the damaged stage 8 disk rim have been found. The latest 'Investigative Update' notes that engine manufacturer GE "is performing high-priority, focused inspections of HPC hardware from other GE90 engines" in support of the Investigation which will help to determine further investigative actions. 


Investigative Updates published by the NTSB on 10 September 2015 and 6 October 2015 are the basis of the above text. Further factual information is expected to be released by the Investigation in due course.

Related Articles

Uncontained Engine Failure

Ignition of Fuels

Engine Failure During Takeoff - Multi-Engine Transport Category Jet Aircraft

Engine/APU on Fire: Guidance for Controllers

Engine Fire Protection

Operational Fires

Rejected Take Off

Emergency Evacuation on Land

Emergency Communications

Rescue and Fire Fighting Services


Further Reading

Boeing article: Flight Crew Response to In-Flight Smoke, Fire, or Fumes

FAA Advisory Circular 120-80 “In Flight Fires”






