






Description
On the evening of 7 March 2014, contact was lost with a Boeing 777-200ER (9M-MRO) being operated by Malaysian Airlines on a scheduled night passenger flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing as MH370 after it deviated from its eight planned route for no known reason. It is subsequently believed to have crashed in international waters somewhere in the South Indian Ocean.  Despite an extensive underwater search for the bulk of the wreckage, it has not been found and after almost three years, the search has been suspended. Unless the main wreckage site can be located, it is considered that it will not be possible for the Malaysian-led Investigation to establish the circumstances that led to the failure of the aircraft to complete its intended flight. Interim Statements have been issued by the Malaysian Investigation Team and a very detailed Final Report on the Sea Search has been issued by the Australians who coordinated it. There were 239 people, including 12 crew members, on board the aircraft.

Investigation
An Investigation is being carried out by the Malaysian Air Accident Investigation Bureau according to ICAO Annex 13 principles. Accredited representatives from the following seven Air Accident and Incident Investigation Organisations are assigned to the Investigation:


 The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) of Australia

 The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) of United Kingdom

 The Air Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) of Singapore

 The Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses pour la Sécurité de l'Aviation Civile (BEA) of France

 The Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC)

 The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) of United States of America

 The National Transportation Safety Committee (NTSC) of Indonesia


A Preliminary Report detailing initial progress with the Investigation was completed on 9 April 2014 and published on 1 May 2014.
A further Interim Statement and a lengthy accompanying Report with the title "Factual Information" were published on 8 March 2015.  
On 8 March 2016, a 2nd Interim Statement was issued noting the recovery of a flaperon from the Réunion  on 29 July 2015 and the continuing work of the Investigation Team on "eight relevant areas" as follows:


 Diversion from the Filed Flight Plan Route;

 Air Traffic Services Operations; 

 Flight Crew Profile;

 Airworthiness & Maintenance and Aircraft Systems;

 Satellite Communications;

 Wreckage and Impact Information (following the recovery and verification of a flaperon from the aircraft);

 Organisation and Management Information of the Department of Civil Aviation (DCA), Malaysia and MAS; and

 Aircraft Cargo Consignment.


The most recent 3rd Interim Statement was issued on 8 March 2017. 
It was established early in the Investigation that the aircraft proceeded to climb on the flight planned track after departure and reported having reached its initial cruise level of FL350 some 20 minutes after take off. Just under 20 minutes after that, as the aircraft approached the ACC boundary at waypoint IGARI, it was instructed by Kuala Lumpur ATCC to change to Ho Chi Minh ATCC. The acknowledgment of this instruction was the last R/T call received from the aircraft. It was found that the last ACARS transmission from the aircraft had been received some 26 minutes after take off and that the SSR tag had disappeared from the radar screen at Kuala Lumpur ATCC almost immediately after the acknowledgment of the frequency change had been transmitted. After just over four hours, during which attempts made to locate the aircraft were unsuccessful, the Rescue Coordination Centre (RCC) was opened at 2130Z and SAR operations immediately commenced in the South China Sea.
A military radar recording was subsequently found to show the aircraft turning back from the vicinity of the last known position on the ATCC radar, and flying west to track in the vicinity of the Malaysia/Thailand border and the SAR operation was briefly extended to the Straits of Malacca to the west of the Malaysian Peninsula.
It was then found that a satellite operated by the British communications company Inmarsat had continued to receive ‘handshake’ messages transmitted automatically by the aircraft after all other contact had been lost. Based on this data and some complex analysis of it, it was deduced that the aircraft had turned south in the vicinity of Penang and “ended its flight in the southern part of the Indian Ocean” some time after 0019Z on 8 March.
A huge and complex but ultimately unsuccessful search effort has been mounted in a defined area of the south Indian Ocean in the hope of locating the aircraft and/or any part of it co-ordinated by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB). The ATSB issued a Final Report on the "Sea Search" for MH370 on 3 October 2017. The ATSB has noted the current absence of any requirement for real time tracking of aircraft transiting remote areas and that “there have now been two occasions during the last five years when large commercial air transport aircraft have gone missing and their last position was not accurately known”. Because of this the Bureau made a Safety Recommendation on this subject as follows:


 that the International Civil Aviation Organisation examine the safety benefits of introducing a standard for real time tracking of commercial air transport aircraft.


After industry consultations and ICAO Council approval, Annex 6 Part 1 will be amended to introduce a requirement that, with effect from 1 January 2021, all new aeroplanes with an MTOM greater that 27,000kg which are - or appear to be - in "a distress condition" are able to transmit information which will enable their position to be determined at least once every minute. A Recommendation that the same is facilitated on all new aeroplanes with an MTOM greater than 5700 kg with effect from the same date has also been made. Older aircraft will not be required to be made similarly capable but if they are, it will remove the requirement to carry a second ELT.

Related Articles

Transponder

Aircraft Communications, Addressing and Reporting System

 Underwater Locator Beacon (ULB)






