










Description
On 27 September 2007, a Beech 90 King Air being operated single pilot by a small UK air taxi operator on a day cargo flight from Southend UK to Zurich left the runway after unintentionally touching down at destination without the landing gear extended following an approach in day VMC. The pilot, the only occupant, was uninjured but the aircraft was declared a hull loss because of substantial damage.

Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the Swiss Aircraft Investigation Bureau. It was found that during the approach at destination, the pilot had asked if he could reduce his speed to 160 KIAS. Because of a jet aircraft next in the approach sequence, ATC inquired  how long this speed could be maintained and were told until three miles. However, the speed of 160 KIAS was above the maximum permitted speed for extending the landing gear. The pilot forgot to lower the gear and the aircraft touched down almost half way down Runway 14 with its gear retracted, and departed the right side of the runway after a further 615 metres. It finally stopped approximately five metres from the runway edge having turned 90 degrees to the right
No indications of any pre-existing technical defects which may have contributed to the accident were found. The Formal Statement of cause was:

“The accident is attributable to the fact that the pilot forgot to extend the landing gear under self-imposed pressure of time.” 
It was noted that “the fact that the pilot decided to maintain, for an excessive period, a speed which made it difficult for him to establish the final approach configuration in good time contributed to the accident.”
The Final Report of the Investigation was published on 9 October 2008 and may be seen in full at SKYbrary bookshelf: Investigation Report No. u2005
No Safety Recommendations were made

Further Reading

 Runway Excursion

 Runway End Safety Area

 Gear-Up Landing (OGHFA SE)

 Error Management (OGHFA BN)

  Press-on-itis (OGHFA BN)






