












Contents

1 Description
2 Synopsis
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 2 February 2005, a Challenger, being operated by Platinum Jet Management, crashed after attempting a high speed rejected take off due to difficulty rotating to depart Teterboro, New Jersey, USA. The aircraft center of gravity was found to have been outside the allowable envelope for take off and the rejected take off to have been commenced at a substantial margin above the applicable V1 speed.

Synopsis
This is an extract from the Executive Summary of the official report into the accident published by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) (USA).
“On February 2, 2005, about 0718 eastern standard time, a Bombardier Challenger CL-600-1A11, N370V, ran off the departure end of runway 6 at Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey, at a ground speed of about 110 kts203.72 km/h 56.54 m/s; through an airport perimeter fence; across a six-lane highway (where it struck a vehicle); and into a parking lot before impacting a building. The two pilots were seriously injured, as were two occupants in the vehicle. The cabin aide, eight passengers, and one person in the building received minor injuries. The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and postimpact fire. The accident flight was an on-demand passenger charter flight from TEB to Chicago Midway Airport, Chicago, Illinois. The flight was …operated by Platinum Jet Management…Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan. The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the accident was the pilots’ failure to ensure the airplane was loaded within weight-and-balance limits and their attempt to take off with the center of gravity well forward of the forward takeoff limit, which prevented the airplane from rotating at the intended rotation speed.”

Related Articles

 Ground Operations

 Runway Excursion


Further Reading

 NTSB Accident Report AAR-06/04, Runway Overrun and Collision, Platinum Jet Management, LLC, Bombardier Challenger CL-600-1A11, N370V, Teterboro, New Jersey, February 2, 2005.






