












Description
On 28 November 2005, a Dornier 328 being operated by Austrian-registered operator EuroManx on a scheduled passenger service from Isle of Man to an unspecified destination was unable to rotate at the speed calculated as applicable and the take off was successfully rejected.

Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the UK AAIB. It was established that the aircraft had been de/anti iced with a heated mixture of 75% Type II+ fluid and 25% water. The take off was planned for Flaps 12 and a V1/Vr of 109 knots was selected. The aircraft commander, who was PF, subsequently found that, when attempting to move the control column aft for rotation, the aircraft did not respond and so the take off was rejected.
The weather at the time did not fall within the definition of icing conditions but having used type II fluid for de‑icing/anti-icing, the correct V1/Vr was actually the “icing” Vo/Vr of 128 knots. Both pilots had recently completed their type rating training with different Type Rating Training Organisations followed by line training with the Operator. They had been provided with an easy reference chart listing the appropriate takeoff speeds but neither was aware of the AFM requirement under ‘Normal Procedures’ to use icing takeoff speeds in non-icing conditions following the application of thickened fluids, for which there was no parallel reference in the Company Operations Manual. 
The Investigation noted that V1/Vr speeds for icing conditions in the Do 328 AFM are typically around 20 knots higher than those for non-icing conditions. And that such a large increase is not unusual for turbo-prop aircraft such as the Dornier 328 that are fitted with de-icing, but not anti‑icing, systems.
The Investigation concluded as follows:
“The probable cause of the incident was the incorrect V1/Vr speed selected. Had the correct V1/Vr speed been selected then the effects of any contamination of the horizontal stabiliser and elevator undersurfaces with thickened fluid would probably have been negated by the increased airflow and fluid run-off. Had the contamination been untreated frost, it is possible that the aircraft may not have rotated normally, even at the higher rotation speed.  Contamination must have been present because the aircraft would not rotate at the ‘normal’ rotation speed for its configuration and load but it was not possible to determine whether the contaminant was ice or thickened fluid. However, the de-icing/anti-icing fluid streak marks on the lower surface of the horizontal tailplane surfaces suggested that little or no fluid had been applied to the leading edge of the horizontal tailplane lower surfaces. This may have occurred because the fluid was sprayed from the trailing edge towards the leading edge instead of the recommended method of spraying from the leading edge towards the trailing edge.”
During the Investigation, the Operator issued a ‘Notice to Aircrew’ to all pilots on their Dornier 328 fleet to which was attached the relevant extract from the AFM. The brief summary was:
 "If the aeroplane was treated with de/anti-icing fluids, irrespective of ambient conditions or temperatures and even if non-icing conditions exist: V1, Vr, V2 and Vsec with horn heat on and related takeoff performance for icing conditions MUST be used”  (Vsec = speed for single-engined climb)." 
The Final Report of the Investigation was published on 5 October 2006 and may be seen in full at SKYbrary bookshelf: AAIB - Bulletin: 10/2006 EW/C2005/11/08
Two Safety Recommendations were made as a result of the Investigation and are reproduced below as published in the Report:


 The Joint Aviation Authorities should contact all Dornier 328 Type Rating Training Organisations within JAA member States and emphasise the need to train pilots to use icing speeds following de-icing/anti-icing with thickened fluids, even when in non-icing conditions. (2006-072)

 EuroManx should provide annual pre-winter flying awareness refresher training and information to all its flight crews. This refresher training should emphasise the need to use the correct icing speeds even in non icing conditions. (2006-073)


Further Reading

 Rejected Take Off

 Aircraft Ground De/Anti Icing

 De/Anti-Icing Code

 Pilot judgment and expertise (OGHFA BN)






