












Contents

1 Description
2 Synopsis
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On 24th December 2000, a Hawaiian Airlines MCDONNELL DOUGLAS DC-10 overran the runway at Tahiti after landing long on a wet runway having encountered crosswinds and turbulence on approach in thunderstorms.

Synopsis
This is an extract of the synopsis from the official report into the incident published by the French BEA.
"While landing on runway 04, in a storm, the airplane touched down about halfway down the runway. It overran the end of the runway and came to a stop resting on its engines, its nose in the lagoon."
The Report's conclusions include:


"During the final approach, the airplane entered an area of rain and turbulence associated with the presence of a storm.

The runway was wet, the wind was blowing from the left at the threshold of runway 04 and was between 18 and 28 kts51.856 km/h 14.392 m/s.

Due to the difficulties in controlling the airplane, thrust reduction was late.

The touchdown of the main landing gear wheels occurred about one thousand three hundred meters [4000 feet] after the displaced threshold of runway 04.

Landing with a crosswind on the wet runway with a low vertical speed made it impossible for the spoilers to be deployed automatically.

The flight engineer extended the spoilers manually eight seconds after touchdown of the main landing gear wheels.

The airplane touched down to the right of the runway centerline, then its track veered to the left before coming back towards the center.

The airplane left the runway along the extended centerline then came to a stop with its nose in the lagoon.


The Report states the cause of the accident to have been:
"The accident was caused by the failure, during the preparation for the approach, to take into account the risk of a storm passing over the airfield at the time of landing."

Related Articles

 Cumulonimbus

 Microburst

 Tropical Revolving Storm

 Runway Excursion


Further Reading

 For further information see the full BEA Accident Report






