













Contents

1 Description
2 Synopsis
3 Cause
4 Related Articles


Description
On 10 December 2005, a Douglas DC9-32 operated by Sosoliso Airlines descended below the ILS Decision Altitude without visual reference, on approach to Port Harcourt Nigeria, and control was lost during the attempted initiation of a go around, followed by ground impact and post crash fire.

Synopsis
The following is an extract from the Synopsis to the official Accident Reprt published by the Nigerian Ministry of Aviation:
"On Saturday, 10th December, 2005, the Sosoliso aircraft registered 5NBFD with call sign OSL 1145 departed Abuja at 1225 hours UTC on a scheduled passenger flight en-route Port Harcourt with 110 persons on Board (103 passengers and 7 crew). The flight continued normally until final approach to Port Harcourt. The aircraft was carrying out an ILS approach to Runway 21 and had reported established on the glide and localiser at 6 miles to touch down. The controller then cleared the aircraft to land but to exercise caution as the runway surface was slightly wet and the pilot acknowledged. Soon after, the aircraft made impact with the grassy strip between Runway 21 and taxiway i.e. 70m to the left of the runway edge and 540m from the Runway 21 threshold. At about 60m from the first impact, the aircraft tail section impacted heavily with a concrete drainage culvert and the aircraft then disintegrated and caught fire along its path. The total wreckage trail covered a distance of 1120 m0.605 nm 1.12 km 3,674.541 ft. The accident resulted in 108 fatalities and 2 survivors."

Cause
"The probable cause of the accident was the crew's decision to continue the approach beyond the Decision Altitude without having the runway and/or airport in sight.
The contributory factors were:


 The crew's delayed decision to carry out a missed approach and the application of improper procedure while executing the go-around.

 The aircraft encountered adverse weather conditions with the ingredients of wind shear activity on approach.

 The reducing visibility in thunderstorm and rain as at the time the aircraft came in to land was also a contributory factor to the accident. And the fact the airfield lightings were not on may also have impaired the pilot from sighting the runway.

 Another contributory factor was the fact that the aircraft had an impact with the exposed drainage concrete culvert which led to its disintegration and subsequent tire outbreak."


The Final Report of the Investigation was issued by the Accident Investigation & Prevention Bureau of the Nigerian Federal Ministry of Aviation on 20 July 2006.

Related Articles

 Cumulonimbus

 Low Level Wind Shear

 Missed Approach

 Loss of Control






