













Contents

1 Description
2 The Investigation
3 Findings
4 Probable Cause
5 Safety Recommendations
6 The Final Report in full
7 FAA Call to Action on Airline Safety & Pilot Training
8 Related Articles


Description
On 12 February 2009, a Bombardier DHC-8-400 also known as a 'Q400' which was being operated by Colgan Air on a scheduled public transport flight in the USA from Newark to Buffalo-Niagara under a Continental Airlines flight number as part of a codeshare agreement in place between the two operators was on an ILS approach to the destination runway in night VMC when control was lost and the aircraft crashed and burned in a residential area approximately 5 nm9,260 m 9.26 km 30,380.577 ft from the runway killing all occupants and one additional person on the ground.

The Investigation
The Investigation was carried out by the NTSB. It established that the aircraft commander had been PF and that the aircraft had been fully serviceable and not subject to any significant effects` attributable to ice accretion at the time of the accident. However, reference airspeeds set by the flight crew for the approach were not compatible with the position of the “reference speeds switch” which was in the “increase” (icing conditions) position which would therefore automatically trigger a stall warning in the form of a stick shaker activation at a higher airspeed.
As a result, when a stick shaker activation occurred at about 6nm from touchdown, the aircraft was actually around 20 to 22 knots above a stall rather than the a 5 to 7 knots which this activation normally indicates. The activation was automatically accompanied by autopilot disconnection automatically and the PF responded with a power increase and an abrupt aft movement on the control column. This had the effect of increasing the angle of attack (AOA) from +8° to +13° with a pitch attitude of about +18° and led to airspeed reducing from 131 kt242.612 km/h 67.334 m/s at the onset of the stall to 125 kt231.5 km/h 64.25 m/s. The airflow over the wing separated as the stall AOA was exceeded and a wing drop occurred. The Report concludes, following this description of the beginning of loss of control, that:
“the Captain’s inappropriate aft control column inputs in response to the stick shaker caused the airplane’s wing to stall”
Three stick pusher activations then followed in rapid succession, beginning as AOA reached +18 degrees. The Captain’s response to each of these was a successively increasing rearward force on the control column - the precise opposite of the applicable SOP for such an event. As a result, the opportunity to regain control of the aircraft was lost.
The investigation also found that the intensity of the post crash fire had been  aggravated by release of gas from a domestic supply pipe damaged by the aircraft ground impact. 
these issues are addressed to the FAA."

Findings
A total of 46 findings recorded in the Report as the formal conclusions of the Investigation included the following, all quoted verbatim:


 The Captain’s inappropriate aft control column inputs in response to the stick shaker caused the airplane’s wing to stall

 The minimal aircraft performance degradation resulting from ice accumulation did not affect the flight crew’s ability to fly and control the airplane

 Explicit cues associated with the impending stick shaker onset, including the decreasing margin between indicated airspeed and the low-speed cue, the airspeed trend vector pointing downward into the low-speed cue, the changing color of the numbers on the airplane’s indicated airspeed display, and the airplane’s excessive nose-up pitch attitude, were presented on the flight instruments with adequate time for the pilots to initiate corrective action, but neither pilot responded to the presence of these cues

…the failure of both pilots to detect this situation was the result of a significant breakdown in their monitoring responsibilities and workload management

 The Captain’s response to stick shaker activation should have been automatic,but his improper flight control inputs were inconsistent with his training and were instead consistent with startle and confusion

 The Captain did not recognize the stick pusher’s action to decrease angle-of-attack as a proper step in a stall recovery, and his improper flight control inputs to override the stick pusher exacerbated the situation.

 It is unlikely that the captain was deliberately attempting to perform a tailplane stall recover

 No evidence indicated that the Q400 was susceptible to a tailplane stall.

The Captain’s failure to effectively manage the flight



enabled conversation that delayed checklist completion and conflicted with sterile cockpit procedures and

created an environment that impeded timely error detection.  



The monitoring errors made by the accident flight crew demonstrate the continuing need for specific pilot training on active monitoring skills.

 Colgan Air’s standard operating procedures at the time of the accident did not promote effective monitoring behavior.

 The pilots’ performance was likely impaired because of fatigue, but the extent of their impairment and the degree to which it contributed to the performance deficiencies that occurred during the flight cannot be conclusively determined.

 Colgan Air did not proactively address the pilot fatigue hazards associated with operations at a predominantly commuter base.

 Operators have a responsibility to identify risks associated with commuting,implement strategies to mitigate these risks, and ensure that their commuting pilots are fit for duty.

 The current air carrier approach-to-stall training did not fully prepare the flight crew for an unexpected stall in the Q400 and did not address the actions that are needed to recover from a fully developed stall.

 The inclusion of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration icing video in Colgan  Air’s winter operations training may lead pilots to assume that a tailplane stall might be possible in the Q400, resulting in negative training.

 The current Federal Aviation Administration surveillance standards for oversight at air carriers undergoing rapid growth and increased complexity of operations do not guarantee that any challenges encountered by the carriers as a result of these changes will be appropriately mitigated.

 Mandatory flight operational quality assurance programs would enhance flight safety because all operators would have readily available data to identify operational risks and use in developing corrective actions.


Probable Cause
The NTSB determined that "the probable cause of this accident was the captain’s inappropriate response to the activation of the stick shaker, which led to an aerodynamic stall from which the airplane did not recover. 
Contributing to the accident were:


the flight crew’s failure to monitor airspeed in relation to the rising position of the lowspeed cue, 

the flight crew’s failure to adhere to sterile cockpit procedures, 

the captain’s failure to effectively manage the flight, and 

Colgan Air’s inadequate procedures for airspeed selection and management during approaches in icing conditions."


Safety Recommendations
A total of 24 new Safety Recommendations were made in the Report, all to the FAA. They are reproduced here verbatim:


 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to review their standard operating procedures to verify that they are consistent with the flight crew monitoring techniques described in Advisory Circular (AC) 120-71A, “Standard Operating Procedures for Flight Deck Crewmembers”; if the procedures are found not to be consistent, revise the procedures according to the AC guidance to promote effective monitoring. (A-10-10)

 Require that airspeed indicator display systems on all aircraft certified under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 25 and equipped with electronic flight instrument systems depict a yellow/amber cautionary band above the low-speed cue or airspeed indicator digits that change from white to yellow/amber as the airspeed approaches the low-speed cue, consistent with Advisory Circular 25-11A, “Electronic Flight Displays.” (A-10-11)

 For all airplanes engaged in commercial operations under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 121, 135, and 91K, require the installation of low-airspeed alert systems that provide pilots with redundant aural and visual warnings of an impending hazardous low-speed condition. (A-10-12) 

 Issue an advisory circular with guidance on leadership training for upgrading captains at 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators, including methods and techniques for effective leadership; professional standards of conduct; strategies for briefing and debriefing; reinforcement and correction skills; and other knowledge, skills, and abilities that are critical for air carrier operations. (A-10-13)

 Require all 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to provide a specific course on leadership training to their upgrading captains that is consistent with the advisory circular requested in Safety Recommendation A-10-13. (A-10-14)

 Develop, and distribute to all pilots, multimedia guidance materials on professionalism in aircraft operations that contain standards of performance for professionalism; best practices for sterile cockpit adherence; techniques for assessing and correcting pilot deviations; examples and scenarios; and a detailed review of accidents involving breakdowns in sterile cockpit and other procedures, including this accident. Obtain the input of operators and air carrier and general aviation pilot groups in the development and distribution of these guidance materials. (A-10-15) 

 Require all 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to address fatigue risks associated with commuting, including identifying pilots who commute, establishing policy and guidance to mitigate fatigue risks for commuting pilots, using scheduling practices to minimize opportunities for fatigue in commuting pilots, and developing or identifying rest facilities for commuting pilots. (A-10-16)

 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to document and retain electronic and/or paper records of pilot training and checking events in sufficient detail so that the carrier and its principal operations inspector can fully assess a pilot’s entire training performance. (A-10-17)

Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to include the training records requested in Safety Recommendation A-10-17 as part of the remedial training program requested in Safety Recommendation A-05-14. (A-10-18)

 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to provide the training records requested in Safety Recommendation A-10-17 to hiring employers to fulfill their requirement under the Pilot Records Improvement Act. (A-10-19)

 Develop a process for verifying, validating, auditing, and amending pilot training records at 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to guarantee the accuracy and completeness of the records. (A-10-20)

 Direct 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators of airplanes equipped with a reference speeds switch or similar device to



develop procedures to establish that, during approach and landing, airspeed reference bugs are always matched to the position of the switch and 

implement specific training to ensure that pilots demonstrate proficiency in this area. (A-10-21)



 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators and 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 142 training centers to develop and conduct training that incorporates stalls that are fully developed; are unexpected; involve autopilot disengagement; and include airplane-specific features, such as a reference speeds switch. (A-10-22)

 Require all 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators of stick pusher-equipped aircraft to provide their pilots with pusher familiarization simulator training. (A-10-23) 

 Define and codify minimum simulator model fidelity requirements to support an expanded set of stall recovery training requirements, including recovery from stalls that are fully developed. These simulator fidelity requirements should address areas such as required angle-of-attack and sideslip angle ranges, motion cueing, proof-of-match with post-stall flight test data, and warnings to indicate when the simulator flight envelope has been exceeded. (A-10-24)

 Identify which airplanes operated under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K are susceptible to tailplane stalls and then



require operators of those airplanes to provide an appropriate airplane-specific tailplane stall recovery procedure in their training manuals and company procedures and

direct operators of those airplanes that are not susceptible to tailplane stalls to ensure that training and company guidance for the airplanes explicitly states this lack of susceptibility and contains no references to tailplane stall recovery procedures. (A-10-25)



 Develop more stringent standards for surveillance of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121 135, and 91K operators that are experiencing rapid growth, increased complexity of operations, accidents and/or incidents, or other changes that warrant increased oversight, including the following:



verify that inspector staffing is adequate to accomplish the enhanced surveillance that is promulgated by the new standards, 

increase staffing for those certificates with insufficient staffing levels, and

augment the inspector staff with available and airplane-type-qualified inspectors from all Federal Aviation Administration regions and 14 CFR Part 142 training centers to provide quality assurance over the operators’ aircrew program designee workforce. (A-10-26)



 Require all 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to 



develop and implement flight operational quality assurance programs that collect objective flight data, #analyze these data and implement corrective actions to identified systems safety issues, and 

share the deidentified aggregate data generated through these analyses with other interested parties in the aviation industry through appropriate means. (A-10-27)



 Seek specific statutory and/or regulatory authority to protect data that operators share with the Federal Aviation Administration as part of any flight operational quality assurance program. (A-10-28)

 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to 



routinely download and analyze all available sources of safety information, as part of their flight operational quality assurance program, to identify deviations from established norms and procedures; 

provide appropriate protections to ensure the confidentiality of the deidentified aggregate data; and 

ensure that this information is used for safety-related and not punitive purposes. (A-10-29)



 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to incorporate explicit guidance to pilots, including checklist reminders as appropriate, prohibiting the use of personal portable electronic devices on the flight deck. (A-10-30)

 Implement a process to document that all 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators have taken appropriate action in response to safety-critical information transmitted through the safety alert for operators process or another method. (A-10-31)

 Require 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to revise the methodology for programming their adverse weather phenomena reporting and forecasting subsystems so that the subsystem-generated weather document for each flight contains all pertinent weather information, including Airmen’s Meteorological Information, Significant Meteorological Information, and other National Weather Service in-flight weather advisories, and omits weather information that is no longer valid. (A-10-32)

 Require principal operations inspectors of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, 135, and 91K operators to periodically review the weather documents generated for their carriers to verify that those documents are consistent with the information requested in Safety Recommendation A-10-32. (A-10-33)

 Update the definitions for reportable icing intensities in the Aeronautical Information Manual so that the definitions are consistent with the more detailed intensities defined in Advisory Circular 91-74A, “Pilot Guide: Flight in Icing Conditions.” (A-10-34)


Three previously issued Safety Recommendations to the FAA were also re-iterated.

The Final Report in full
The 299 page NTSB Final Report AAR-10/01 was adopted by the Board on 2 February 2010.

FAA Call to Action on Airline Safety & Pilot Training
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) conducted a public hearing on this accident from May 12-14, 2009. During that hearing and subsequent congressional hearings on June 10 and June 11, 2009, several issues came to light regarding pilot training and qualifications, flight crew fatigue, and consistency of safety standards between operators.
In response to this information, on June 15, 2009, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood and FAA Administrator J. Randolph Babbitt initiated a Call to Action on Airline Safety and Pilot Training for FAA, air carriers, and labor organizations to jointly identify and implement safety improvements, and  an action plan was published on 24 June 2009.
In January 2010, the FAA published a progress report titled FAA "Answering the Call to Action on Airline Safety & Pilot Training".

Related Articles
LOC


 Loss of Control

 Recovery from Unusual Aircraft Attitudes

 Stall

 Flight Envelope


HF


 Sterile Flight Deck (OGHFA BN)

 Crew Resource Management (OGHFA BN)

 Fatigue Manifestations (OGHFA BN)






