












Description
On 29 April 2016, an Airbus Helicopters H225 (LN-OJF) being operated by CHC Helikopter Service on a non scheduled commercial passenger transport flight from the Gullfaks B Platform to Bergen as HKS241 was in the cruise at 2,000 feet in day VMC. It had just reached the coast when the main rotor head and mast suddenly detached as it passed over the Island of Turøy, 13nm north-northwest of its destination. The helicopter was destroyed by the subsequent impact and fire and all 13 occupants were killed.

Investigation
An Investigation is being carried out by the AIB Norway. Recorded radar data was available showing the track of the helicopter almost up to the point of impact. The CVFDR was recovered from the tail section at the main wreckage site and taken to the UK AAIB where both voice and flight data was successfully downloaded. These data showed that everything had appeared to be normal until sudden catastrophic failure had occurred in the space of 1-2 seconds at which point both recordings ceased abruptly. 
No evidence has been found to indicate flight crew actions were a factor in the accident. The Investigation also had a spectral analysis of the CVR data carried out and this displayed no obvious indication that any prior abnormality had preceded the sudden detachment of the rotor head. The HUMS NVM Card was retrieved and it was possible to download some of the flight data parameters which had been routinely stored on the card for OFDM purposes. These continued after the CVFDR recording ceased for approximately 13 further seconds and provided valuable information about the sequence of events as control was lost.
The Investigation initially sought to recover as many potentially key component mechanical parts from the widespread wreckage as possible and extensive underwater and on-land searches have continued. The initial effort in this respect has been sufficient to lead the work of the Investigation towards the origin of the structural failure sequence. However, although findings essential for progress have been made, “there are still some important components that are missing”.
A map showing the aircraft track and the disposition of significant pieces of the wreckage at the accident site is shown below.

 An annotated map of the accident site (reproduced from the first Preliminary Report)
The parts recovered included part or all of several of the Main Gear Box (MGB) second stage epicyclic module planet gears P/N 332A32.3335 which are designed as a combined gear and bearing assembly in which the external surface acts as a gear whilst the internal surface acts as the outer surface of an internal roller bearing. Two pieces of one of these planet gears were put together and found to be approximately half of a complete gear. Their closer examination then found features strongly consistent with fatigue at their point of separation. This appears to have originated in the outer race of the bearing i.e. inside the gear and then propagated towards the web of the gear teeth. 
Further examination of these parts has been undertaken and has found that one of these fracture surfaces “can be described as being close to 100% fatigue”. The two illustrations below show the evidence. The fatigue "appears to have its origin in the outer race of the bearing (inside of the gear), propagating towards the web of the gear teeth". A CT examination then disclosed that there are “several cracks below the surface of the outer race”, one of which “runs below the surface between areas of surface damage (spalling)”.  

 The two pieces of the second stage planet gear prepared for metallurgical examinations. The fracture surface with fatigue is to the right in the figure. [Reproduced from the Official Report]
 A close-up of the fracture surface on the inner surface (outer race) showing multiple cracks propagating from a major crack on the convex fracture surface. [Reproduced from the Official Report]
It has been noted that since propagation of any fatigue crack requires repeated load cycles such as rotation of a gear or a main rotor start/stop cycle, “more work is required both to understand the propagation rate and the origin of the observed fatigue cracks”. Pending this work, it is currently considered “most likely that the fatigue fracture of this planet gear subsequently resulted in loss of the main rotor”. It is considered “unlikely that this fatigue crack propagated as a consequence of a structural break-up of another component”.
The lack of any magnetic debris of the sort which should provide an early warning of possible failure inside the epicyclic module through its appearance on the chip detectors widely relied upon for this purpose has been identified as a matter of  significance, since the generic design assumption has been that “propagation of a crack would be suppressed by the compressive surface stress” so that “a crack in the surface area should grow outboard and create the spalling that would produce magnetic debris". It has been noted that HUMS provides an additional way to detect developing degradation. 
It has been noted that this issue was examined during the UK AAIB Investigation into the fatal accident to an AS332 L2 Super Puma in 2009 in which catastrophic failure of the main rotor gearbox also led to detachment of the hub and main rotor blades in flight and resulted in measures being taken to improve the detection of spalling. However, in the current Investigation, no evidence has yet been found of any malfunction in the magnetic debris detection system of the aircraft or of any failure to follow procedures for visual inspection and pre-flight checks. In addition, “neither are there any records of magnetic debris findings from inspections made since the gearbox was installed in January 2016”. 
An interim Conclusion of the Investigation is therefore that “the observed failure mode in this Investigation seems to differ from what was expected or foreseen during certification”. A sub-surface crack has propagated without creating a significant amount of magnetic debris from spalling and the HUMS appears to have been unable to identify signs that such degradation was developing in the epicyclic module. It therefore appears that the fracture discovered in the second stage planet gear “has propagated in a manner which is unlikely to become detected by existing mandatory or supplementary systems for warning of an imminent failure”.
The finding announced in the previous Preliminary Report on the current Investigation that there may well be a potential airworthiness issue for the MGB installation in other aircraft of the same type and the following Safety Recommendation was issued on 1 June 2016 to EASA that they “should take immediate action to ensure the safety of the Airbus Helicopters H225 Main Gear Box” is supported by the ongoing work of the Investigation.
The most recent findings as described are considered to be a sufficient basis for discounting both the other scenarios under consideration as the initiating event - failure of a suspension bar attachment or failure of the MGB conical housing. 
Further investigation work will now “seek to determine the origin of the fatigue fracture and the mechanisms behind its growth”. It is noted that the Investigation is aware that the gearbox fitted to the accident helicopter “was involved in a road accident during transport in 2015” but also that it was subsequently “inspected, repaired and released for flight by the manufacturer” before installed in January 2016. The possibility of a link between this event and the initiation and growth of a fatigue fracture is being investigated and the Investigation also intends to “look into the follow-up of safety recommendations issued after the Super Puma accident in Scotland in 2009”.
This summary of the Investigation so far is based on the three Preliminary Reports (combined in chronological order of release) issued to report progress during the initial stages of the Investigation on 27 May 2016 (a revised version of an initial Preliminary Report issued on 13 May 2016), on 1 June 2016 and on 28 June 2016. The Investigation has advised “further updates are expected to be less frequent from now on" and Reports will be issued “only if there are significant new Findings”.

Related Articles

Airworthiness - The System

Damage Tolerance

Health and Usage Monitoring System (HUMS)






