










Contents

1 Synopsis
2 Description
3 Conclusions
4 Related Articles
5 Further Reading


Synopsis
On 26 June 2007, at Birmingham Airport UK, a BAe Jetstream 41 started an engine running pushback without using intercom between ground crew and flight crew. The pushback could not be completed as the towbar could not be disconnected and confusion over a decision to return the aircraft to the gate resulted in an attempt to do so with the aircraft brakes selected which caused the aircraft nose landing gear to collapse.

Description
The Report into the Accident produced by UK AAIB states:
"The aircraft was pushed back from Stand 2 at Birmingham Airport onto the centerline of Taxiway W, the parking brake was applied and the nose wheel was chocked. After the pushback the ground crew were unable to disconnect the towbar.  The aircraft commander decided to return the aircraft to the stand. Headsets had not been used during the pushback and communication was via hand signals. The tug attempted to pull the aircraft back onto stand whilst the aircraft parking brake was still applied, and the nose gear collapsed."

Conclusions
The Report includes the following conclusions:
"Pushbacks are a routine manoeuvre, normally performed with headset communications between the flight deck and the pushback crew. The airport instructions and the operator’s towing procedures make no allowance for aircraft pushbacks without headsets. Nevertheless, it was not unusual for them to be conducted using hand signals only. Ground handling staff have now been instructed to use a headset at all times. A routine pushback became unusual  when it was necessary to return the aircraft to stand. There’s no hand signal for ‘I would like to return to stand’ and the commander had difficulty in conveying his wishes to the pushback crew. The resulting breakdown in communication led to the aircraft being damaged."
The Report produces no Safety Recommendations.

Related Articles

Ground Operations

Pushback

Aircraft Towing


Further Reading

AAIB Bulletin 10/2007 - AAIB UK.






