











Contents

1 Description
2 The Investigation
3 Related Articles
4 Further Reading


Description
On November 12, 2003, a Bombardier Learjet 24D being operated on a non scheduled flight by Multi-Aero Inc. was destroyed during a forced landing and post crash fire following a loss of power in both engines after an encounter with a flock of birds just after take off from St. Louis Downtown Airport. Subsequent circumstantial evidence suggested that a flock of European Starlings might have been present. The flight had departed in accordance with a remotely issued take off clearance prior to the local ATC TWR opening. 
The flight crew reported being unable to maintain altitude or attempt engine relight with the residual thrust available and a forced landing was made in which the aircraft contacted the terrain on the downward side of a shallow sloping hill located about three miles from the departure airport. It was destroyed by the impact and a post-crash fire during which most of the cabin and tailcone were burned out. The center section of the fuel tank remained structurally intact, although damaged by impact forces. All three landing gear legs were still attached to the aircraft and found in the retracted position.
The nose of the aircraft remained intact, but the flight deck received extensive fire and heat damage. Both windshields were melted and the upper skin was consumed.  The outboard section of the left wing had separated from the aircraft about 4-5 feet outboard of the fuselage The right wing remained attached to the forward fuselage section. The outboard section of the wing remained attached to the inboard wing section, but it was broken about mid-span and it was partially consumed by fire. 
All onboard escaped with minor or no injuries.

The Investigation
In their Report issued in January 2006, the NTSB determined that the probable cause of the accident was “The total loss of power to the right engine and the partial loss of power to the left engine after the airplane encountered a flock of birds during initial climb out, resulting in impeded ram induction airflow”.

Related Articles

Bird Strike

Operators Checklist for Bird Strike Hazard Management

Aircraft Certification for Bird Strike Risk

Airport Bird Hazard Management

 Other Investigations into Accidents & Serious Incidents following Bird Strikes


Further Reading

For further information see the NTSB Report CHI04FA029






