

















In-Flight Fire Accident

Contents

1 Description
2 In-Flight Fire
3 Synopsis
4 Related Articles
5 Further Reading


Description
On 2 September 1998, an MD-11 aircraft belonging to Swissair, crashed into the sea off Nova Scotia following an in-flight electrical fire.

In-Flight Fire
Fire in the air is one of the most hazardous situations that a flight crew can be faced with. Without aggressive intervention by the flight crew, a fire on board an aircraft can lead to the catastrophic loss of that aircraft within a very short space of time. Once a fire has become established, it is unlikely that the crew will be able to extinguish it. 
For further information, see the main article In-Flight Fire

Synopsis
This is the synopsis of the official report into the accident published by the Transport Safety Board (TSB) (Canada):

"On 2 September 1998, Swissair Flight 111 departed New York, United States of America, at 2018 eastern daylight savings time on a scheduled flight to Geneva, Switzerland, with 215 passengers and 14 crew members on board. About 53 minutes after departure, while cruising at flight level 330, the flight crew smelled an abnormal odour in the cockpit. Their attention was then drawn to an unspecified area behind and above them and they began to investigate the source. Whatever they saw initially was shortly thereafter no longer perceived to be visible. They agreed that the origin of the anomaly was the air conditioning system. When they assessed that what they had seen or were now seeing was definitely smoke, they decided to divert. They initially began a turn toward Boston; however, when air traffic services mentioned Halifax, Nova Scotia, as an alternative airport, they changed the destination to the Halifax International Airport. While the flight crew was preparing for the landing in Halifax, they were unaware that a fire was spreading above the ceiling in the front area of the aircraft. About 13 minutes after the abnormal odour was detected, the aircraft's flight data recorder began to record a rapid succession of aircraft systems-related failures. The flight crew declared an emergency and indicated a need to land immediately. About one minute later, radio communications and secondary radar contact with the aircraft were lost, and the flight recorders stopped functioning. About five and one-half minutes later, the aircraft crashed into the ocean about five nautical miles southwest of Peggy's Cove, Nova Scotia, Canada. The aircraft was destroyed and there were no survivors."
Related Articles

 Airworthiness

 In-Flight Fire: Guidance for Flight Crews

 Loss of Control


Further Reading
For further information:


 TSB Canada report on Swissair Flight 111 (Report Number A98H0003) (Note: This file is 32Mb) 

 FAA "Lessons Learned from  Transport Airplane Accidents": Swissair Flight 111, MD-11

 Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) Accident Prevention, Mar 2004, “Electrical Arc Identified as Likely Source of In-Flight Fire Aboard Swissair MD-11”






