












Description
On 18 November 2009 an IAI Westwind 1124 being operated by Australian charter company Pel-Air on a Medevac flight from Apia, Samoa to Melbourne via an intended refuelling stop at Norfolk Island was unable to obtain sufficient visual reference to complete a night landing despite making four successive non precision approaches and the aircraft commander elected to carry out a controlled ditching offshore as there was not enough fuel left to reach the designated alternate. The ditching was successful but the aircraft broke in two and quickly became submerged. All six occupants managed to escape including, with assistance, the stretchered patient with just one sustaining serious injury. 

Investigation
An Investigation was carried out by the ATSB. The flight was noted to have been operated for aeromedical retrieval purposes and conducted in a transport category aircraft as an aerial work operation. Under Australian regulations, aerial work operations are a separate flight category from passenger carrying charter and scheduled air transport operations. The four passengers on the accident flight were a doctor, a nurse, the patient and one person accompanying the patient.
The Investigation located the submerged aircraft wreckage by using a sonar receiver to pinpoint the ULB signal from the FDR and CVR and a remotely operated vehicle with an underwater video camera attached was then used to assess the wreckage. Recovery of the wreckage was deemed unnecessary as was recovery of the FDR and CVR.
It was noted that the same aircraft and crew had positioned the previous night from Sydney, arriving in Apia via Norfolk Island after approximately 6.5 hours flying time in the early morning and then taking an approximately 11 hour rest period during the day prior to beginning preparations for the return flight to again be undertaken overnight with an early evening departure. Both flight crew reported considering that they had achieved adequate rest during the day.
It was found that pre flight planning by the aircraft commander consisted of obtaining the 12 hour TAF for Norfolk Island whilst submitting the FPL. This indicated that the forecast weather conditions were above the landing and alternate minima, the latter meaning that the FPL did not have to include an alternate. The flight briefing officer who provided the TAF also noted a TREND for the final 3 hours of the TAF periods which detailed an expected deterioration but “when the briefing officer asked if the commander would like the details of the trend, he declined”. It was also noted that the commander did not request an en route forecast and “did not obtain any other meteorological information, NOTAMs or additional briefing information from the briefing officer”. Instead, he used the weather and NOTAM briefing information from the outbound flight from Sydney to Samoa when planning the return flight to Norfolk Island “because of difficulty accessing internet-based briefing resources”.
The aircraft was refuelled to full main tanks but none was added to the tip tanks for the approximately 1470nm flight to Norfolk Island and estimated useable fuel on departure for what was expected to be around a 4 hour flight was 3324kg. The First Officer was designated as PF
The aircraft commander reported that once in the cruise at FL390, he had reviewed the fuel required for the remainder of the flight against the fuel remaining and recalled that the prevailing 80 knot headwind component was greater than expected and adjusting engine thrust setting to achieve a more efficient but slower cruise speed which “would allow the aircraft to complete the flight with the required fuel reserves intact”.
Two and a quarter hours into the flight, a SPECI received for Norfolk Island disclosed an earlier deterioration in the weather than contained in the TAF with a current overcast at 1100 feet aal. This meant that the alternate approach minima for Norfolk Island were no longer met although at that time the landing minima still were.
However, as the flight progressed, even though more evidence of gradually deteriorating weather conditions was received, the aircraft had continued on track beyond the point where the flight crew were confident that the aircraft had sufficient fuel to reach the nearest suitable alternate airport at Tontouta, Noumea. The flight crew indicated that their judgement was affected by doubts about the feasibility of this diversion because of the additional uncertainty in respect of the wind component which might prevail given their experience of the greater than expected headwind component on track. The Investigation considered the possibility that fatigue had affected this judgement but was unable to come to a conclusion either way.
All occupants except the stretchered patient had the benefit of wet drill training and Helicopter Underwater Evacuation Training (HUET) and despite the rapid submerging of the fuselage and the loss of cabin lighting at an early point, all occupants including the patient were able to escape from the wreckage with only one being seriously injured. Some occupants reported having to swim some distance after emerging from the fuselage before reaching the sea surface. 
The intended ditching area was not understood by the Unicom Operator and as a result, the subsequent location of the occupants by a rescue boat was delayed - see the diagram below reproduced from the official report.

 Approximate aircraft track before the ditching (Source: Final Report)
The Investigation made twelve Findings as follows, two of which (so indicated) were described as ‘Minor Safety Issues’:


The pilot in command did not plan the flight in accordance with the existing regulatory and operator requirements, precluding a full understanding and management of the potential hazards affecting the flight.

The flight crew did not source the most recent Norfolk Island Airport forecast, or seek and apply other relevant weather and other information at the most relevant stage of the flight to fully inform their decision of whether to continue the flight to the island, or to divert to another destination.

The flight crew’s delayed awareness of the deteriorating weather at Norfolk Island combined with incomplete flight planning to influence the decision to continue to the island, rather than divert to a suitable alternate.

The available guidance on fuel planning and on seeking and applying en route weather updates was too general and increased the risk of inconsistent in-flight fuel management and decisions to divert. [Minor safety issue]

Given the forecast in-flight weather, aircraft performance and regulatory requirements, the flight crew departed Apia with less fuel than required for the flight in case of one engine inoperative or depressurised operations.

The flight crew’s advice to Norfolk Island Unicom of the intention to ditch did not include the intended location, resulting in the rescue services initially proceeding to an incorrect search datum and potentially delaying the recovery of any survivors.

The operator’s procedures and flight planning guidance managed risk consistent with regulatory provisions but did not effectively minimise the risks associated with aeromedical operations to remote islands. [Minor safety issue]

At the time of flight planning, there were no weather or other requirements that required the nomination of an alternate aerodrome, or the carriage of additional fuel to reach an alternate.

The aircraft carried sufficient fuel for the flight in the case of normal operations.

A number of the flight crew and medical personnel reported that their underwater escape training facilitated their exit from the aircraft following the ditching.

The use by the flight crew of the aircraft’s radar altimeter to flare at an appropriate height probably contributed to a survivable first contact with the sea.

The observation of the pilot in command’s torch re-directed the search to the correct area and facilitated the timely arrival of the rescue craft.


The Investigation Conclusion was as follows:
“The requirement to ditch the aircraft was a consequence of a number of pre- and in-flight actions and decisions that resulted in the flight continuing to Norfolk Island where a safe landing could ultimately not be assured. The delayed in-flight identification and management by the flight crew of the worsening and previously un-forecast weather at Norfolk Island adversely influenced their decision to continue to the island, rather than divert to a suitable alternate.
The investigation could not discount the potential for clearer regulatory or operator guidance in respect of the application of amended en route weather information to have influenced the outcome. If that clearer guidance had been available, the flight crew may have comprehended the need to react to the un-forecast weather deterioration at Norfolk Island earlier and increased the time available to consider their options and undertake the necessary diversion planning.
The occupants’ successful exit from the immersed/submerged aircraft was facilitated by the flight and medical crews’ prior exposure to wet drill and Helicopter Underwater Evacuation Training (HUET). Their location after exiting the aircraft was somewhat fortuitous and (it was noted that otherwise) the outcome may not have been so positive.”
Safety Action taken as a result of the accident by the Regulator CASA, the Aircraft Operator and the Aeromedical Organisation was noted. No Safety Recommendations were made.
The Final Report of the Investigation AO-2009-072 Final was released on 30 August 2012 and a minor correction was made to it on 31 August 2012.

Further Reading

Ditching

Situational Awareness

Fatigue

Decision Making

Pilot Perception






